Costs and Benefits in Voting

The two-party political system is the end result of a cost/benefit analysis individual voters make when deciding on whether or not to head to the ballot box.

Let's face it, your vote is meaningless. I don't mean that to be cynical, I truly mean it. We all know this. Your individual vote does nothing to change the outcome of an election. Yes there is a situation in which your single vote can be a tie breaker. But the changes of that occurring are virtually zero. You can play the lottery too because there's a chance you could win, but it doesn't change the math. Even with all the propaganda around the benefits of voting, people of every political spectrum knows their vote doesn't really matter. The perceived benefit of voting and the actual benefit of voting are both exceedingly low.

In a cost/benefit analysis, you will expend cost proportionate to benefit. If the benefit is high, you're more willing to spend time and energy to get that benefit. If the the benefit is low, you're less likely to do so. Therefore, since voting has no benefit, the costs to voting, in terms of time and energy spent to educate yourself on the issues, comparing candidates, etc, would have to be proportionally low. The political system we have is the natural outcome of this cost/benefit analysis. It has economized to keep the cost of voting low.	The cost is kept low by providing less choice. The more choices, the higher the cost in terms of time spent determining who to vote for. Remember, costs MUST be kept low, otherwise people would just choose not to vote. Another way to keep costs low is through branding. A brand is a promise to the consumer that what they are buying has the quality they've come to expect in the product. A brand allows you to think about other things instead of reading ingredients and other product research. If you're happy with a brand, you just buy that brand. Likewise and for the exact same reason, politics comes with branded packages. If you generally like the product from the Republican brand, your time and energy is saved in having to make a political decision by just voting Republican.

Of course there's the problem of brand counterfeiting. Just because a manufacturer slaps a logo on something, there's no guarantee that it's the real thing. Same with politics. Just because a candidate says they're a Republican, a Democrat, or a Libertarian doesn't mean they really are. If the voter suspects a counterfeit, the cost of making a decision just went up because they're back to comparing candidates on what policies they actually stand for. This point is a bit of digression and irrelevant because most voters don't detect counterfeits because to detect a counterfeit is to already be looking deeper at the issues.

The question is then, if everyone knows there is no personal benefit to casting a vote, why do SOME voters spend a lot of time and energy in doing their due diligence? The costs in terms of time and energy doing that clearly outweighs their personal benefit from voting. They must be getting some benefit that is not part of most peoples calculus. Who really knows since it's a bit subjective, but from personal experience I can tell you it's probably out of a sense of duty. There is joy in thinking you're doing something for the "greater good". For reasons I will not get into here, this is irrational behavior, but I just mention this to highlight that in the end it's still costs vs benefits.